---
layout: post
title: RZ09-0482X
date: 2025-02-16
category: "Device Setup"
permalink: "/notes/device-setup/RZ09-0482X.html"
---

# 0x00 - Latest Updates
- Update the **Audio** section

# 0x01 - Intro
This is my personal journey to utilize Manjaro GNOME (Arch Linux) on my personal daily driver. Feel free to check out and follow up as there will be some updates or things I'd like to customize my driver.

> Note that this guide might be incomplete or unreliable in future usage, so keep up for any incoming updates. If you have any questions or suggestions, ask away through [my email](mailto:rchmdxp@proton.me). I will answer as soon as I can.

# 0x02 - Repository Update

## `chaotic-aur`
The first time when I used [Athena OS](https://athenaos.org/) is the OS itself has a repository called `chaotic-aur`, which is an _unofficial package repository_ that contains pre-built packages from the AUR. For example, you can install Discord, Zoom, Anydesk, or others through `chaotic-aur`.

While `chaotic-aur` might be helpful to install such applications, I still manage myself to manually install tools or drivers that might not available on Manjaro repository through [AUR site](https://aur.archlinux.org/) -- Where you clone the repository package and run `$ makepkg -si` on each package directory.

You can follow along from their [documentation](https://aur.chaotic.cx/docs), or you can follow along on this step as how I installed the repository by myself.
1. Ensure to update the `pacman`'s repository first.
```bash
$ sudo pacman -Syy 
```
2. Retrieve the `chaotic-aur` primary key to enable the installation of the keyring and mirror list, provided by `chaotic-aur`.
```bash
$ sudo pacman-key --recv-key 3056513887B78AEB --keyserver keyserver.ubuntu.com
$ sudo pacman-key --lsign-key 3056513887B78AEB
```
3. After retrieving the primary key, install the `chaotic-keyring` and `chaotic-mirrorlist` packages as well.
```bash
$ sudo pacman -U 'https://cdn-mirror.chaotic.cx/chaotic-aur/chaotic-keyring.pkg.tar.zst'
$ sudo pacman -U 'https://cdn-mirror.chaotic.cx/chaotic-aur/chaotic-mirrorlist.pkg.tar.zst'
```
4. Then, append the following syntax to the `/etc/pacman.conf` repository
```
[chaotic-aur]
Include = /etc/pacman.d/chaotic-mirrorlist
```
5. As the final touch, sync the recently `chaotic-aur` mirrorlist with a full system update
```bash
$ sudo pacman -Syu
```

### Optional recommended settings
If you're living in the non-first-world countries (probably as same as mine), you can optionally run [`powerpill`](https://wiki.archlinux.org/index.php/Powerpill) to download binaries, drivers, and packages, from all mirrors simultaneously. To run `powerpill`, run it in the following terminal.
```bash
$ sudo pacman -Sy && sudo powerpill -Su && paru -Su
```

# 0x03 - Essential Drivers
The first thing I did after installing Manjaro is to install drivers, especially CPU and GPU drivers.

## CPU
I believe that the AMD drivers usually comes pre-installed with Linux, but I gotta make sure that the driver runs perfectly with the latest CPU that I'm using.

To do that, you can run the following command, which is the [simplified version](https://www.reddit.com/r/archlinux/comments/17zgz7b/i_am_new_to_arch_and_linux_how_can_i_install_amd/) of installing AMD drivers.
```bash
$ sudo pacman -S mesa lib32-mesa vulkan-radeon lib32-vulkan-radeon libva-mesa-driver libva-utils
```

## GPU
When it comes to the Nvidia GPU installation, this might be the tricky part, as you'll encounter an enormous guides on how to install it. 

According to the [guide](https://wiki.manjaro.org/index.php/Configure_Graphics_Cards) from Manjaro, you can install the following command for automated identification and installation of Nvidia drivers.

```bash
$ sudo mhwd -a pci nonfree 0300
```
- `-a`: "auto-install."
- `pci`: specifies the type of hardware.
- `nonfree`: ensures that you wanna use _non-free_ (proprietary) drivers.
- `0300`: specifies the PCI class ID for graphics cards.

Alternatively, you can install the Nvidia drivers through `pacman` as well.
```bash
$ sudo pacman -S nvidia nvidia-utils lib32-nvidia-utils optimus-manager nvidia-dkms nvidia-settings
```
- `nvidia`: the main NVIDIA driver.
- `nvidia-utils`: utilities for Nvidia GPUs.
- `lib32-nvidia-utils`: 32-bit libraries for compatibility with 32-bit applications.
- `optimus-manager`: (optional) install hybrid graphics with AMD+Nvidia
- `nvidia-dkms`: (optional) install Nvidia on custom kernel.
- `nvidia-settings`: (optional) other functionality tools.

## Razer Drivers
Once you set up the `chaotic-aur` repository, you can install other binaries/apps from AUR. Since the Razer support is minimal, I ran the following command to search for Razer drivers.
```bash
$ pacman -Ss razer
```
This will search any drivers/libraries/binaries that matches with the syntax `razer`.

If you want to skip search, you can use the following command to install the entire Razer drivers.
```bash
$ sudo pacman -S openrazer-daeomon openrazer-driver-dkms python-openrazer polychromatic
```

# 0x04 - Issues

## Display
If you encountering wack display (watching videos on YouTube but the video is almost like 0.5x slower), consider disabling **Wayland**.

Manjaro has a function to disable Wayland, which is located on Manjaro Hello (the application that starts after the OS has successfully installed). You can click _Gnome Layout Switcher_ > _Settings_, then disable _Wayland session_.

## Audio
One of the issues I've first encountered is the audio. The first time I'm installing the OS is the audio wasn't functionable as it supposed to be, as I was expected for the audio to be functionable as the same as on Windows environment.

I recommend to use Pipewire instead of PulseAudio, as I encountered a lot of issues when using PulseAudio. To run the entire Pipewire audio driver, follow along to use this command to install and enable it.
```bash
$ sudo pacman -S alsa-tools manjaro-pipewire pipewire-pulse easyeffects pipewire-jack pipewire-v4l2 pipewire-x11-bell pipewire-zeroconf 
```

Then, enable the Pipewire on start; so whenever you start your computer, the Pipewre will start as you starting to log into it.
```bash
$ systemctl --user enable pipewire pipewire-pulse

$ systemctl --user start pipewire pipewire-pulse
```

Next, you can install other Pipewire essentials as well, as this might be the optional steps.
```bash
$ sudo pacman -S pipewire pipewire-alsa pipewire-libcamera
```

Once it's done, enable the optional Pipewire binaries.
```bash
$ systemctl --user enable --now pipewire && systemctl --user enable --now wireplumber &&  systemctl --user enable --now pipewire-pulse
```

The issue that I was encountered was there's no audio on my speakers. Surprisingly, the audio from bluetooth, audio jack, as well as the input device (audio recorder on my device) functions really well.

Fortunately, I stumbled across the blog and found the fix, which is from the [kernel.org forum](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=207423#c94){:target="_blank"}. I have uploaded the bash file to fix the audio problem, which you can download it [here](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/attachment.cgi?id=306157){:target="_blank"}

Once you downloaded the file, ensure to choose the speakers to **Speaker - Family 17h\19h\1ah HD Audio Controller**. Once it's done, simply run the command.
```bash
$ sudo bash RB14_2023_enable_internal_speakers_ver2.sh
```
Restart the device, and the audio has been fixed successfully.

### Audio: 2025-04-09 Update
I realized that once I shutdown my computer, the audio problem still persists, meaning the audio kernel is returned to the previous state until I run the `RB14_2023_enable_internal_speakers_ver2.sh` bash file again. 

Luckily, I read the forum again and I found the guide on how to keep the kernel audio persists through this [guide](https://bugzilla.kernel.org/show_bug.cgi?id=207423#c114){:target="_blank"}.

#### Make the script become persistent after reboot
Once you've installed the bash file, ensure to rename it to make the script name simpler and make it become an executable script.
```bash
$ mv RB14_2023_enable_internal_speakers_ver2.sh rz_audio_hwC2D0

$ chmod a+x rz_audio_hwC2D0
```

Then, move the script into the `/usr/local/bin` directory to a permanent location.
```bash
$ mv rz_audio_hwC2D0 /usr/local/bin/
```

Next, allow the script to run without sudo password required by creating a sudoers file.
```bash
$ sudo touch /etc/sudoers.d/rz_audio_fix
```

Within the sudoers file, add the `echo` line and make sure to replace `yournamehere` with your actual username (on `whoami`)
```bash
$ echo 'yournamehere ALL=(ALL) NOPASSWD: /usr/local/bin/rz_audio_hwC2D0' | sudo tee -a /etc/sudoers.d/rz_audio_fix
```

After that, we can create a `systemd` service, by creating a service file first.
```bash
$ sudo nano /etc/systemd/system/rz_audio_fix.service
```

Then, we can paste the following (correcting the path if needed), then save and exit.
```ini
[Unit]
Description=Fix Razer Audio on Boot

[Service]
Type=oneshot
ExecStart=/usr/bin/sudo /usr/local/bin/rz_audio_hwC2D0
RemainAfterExit=true

[Install]
WantedBy=multi-user.target
```

Once everything is set, we can enable the service that we created.
```bash
$ sudo systemctl daemon-reload
$ sudo systemctl enable rz_audio_fix.service
$ sudo systemctl start rz_audio_fix.service
```

Finally, we can verify if everything works.
```bash
$ sudo systemctl status rz_audio_fix.service
```

Then, we can reboot the system.
```bash
$ reboot
```